README.md, before:

# LoopAutoma

![Logo](./doc/img/logo.png)

[![CI](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/actions/workflows/ci.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/graph/badge.svg?token=IdaePvWHB4)](https://codecov.io/gh/chrisgleissner/loopautoma)
[![License: GPL v2](https://img.shields.io/github/license/chrisgleissner/loopautoma)](LICENSE)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS%20%7C%20Windows-forestgreen)](doc/architecture.md)

> [!NOTE]
> This project is under active development and not yet fully functional. Some of this documentation refers to not yet fully implemented features.

Cross‑platform desktop automation that watches configurable screen regions and performs keyboard/mouse actions when conditions are met.

## Features

- Keep agents moving: automatically type "Continue" and press enter when an agent stalls.
- **LLM-powered prompts**: Use GPT-4 Vision to analyze screen content and generate context-aware prompts with risk-based guardrails.
- Run unattended: detect stable/changed UI regions and advance the flow.
- Stay safe: cooldowns, rate limits, and guardrails to keep automation bounded.
- Modern UI: dual light/dark palettes, responsive layout, and inline tooltips/icons across every panel.
- Action ergonomics: insert special keys from a dropdown or inline `{Key:Enter}` syntax that automatically splits into discrete actions.

## Quick Start Tutorial

![LoopAutoma UI](./doc/img/ui-screenshot.png)

Need a detailed walkthrough of every panel? Read the [User Manual](doc/userManual.md).

**[Download the latest release](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/releases/latest)** with pre-built installers for Linux, macOS, and Windows.

Available formats:

- **Linux**: .deb, .rpm, AppImage
- **macOS**: .dmg (Intel and Apple Silicon)
- **Windows**: .exe installer and .msi

### Ubuntu/Debian Example

```bash
# Download the .deb from releases page, then install
sudo apt install ./loopautoma_*.deb

# Run the app
loopautoma
```

**Note**: Linux requires an X11 session (not Wayland). Check with `echo "$XDG_SESSION_TYPE"` — if it shows `wayland`, switch to X11 at the login screen.

### Using the Keep AI Agent Active Preset

The app loads with a ready-to-use preset that keeps AI agents running:

1. **Define watch regions**: Click the mouse icon (tooltip "Define watch region") and drag over areas where your agent shows output or progress indicators
2. **Start monitoring**: Hit "Start" — the app watches for UI changes and types "continue" + Enter when activity stops
3. **Walk away confidently**: Built-in guardrails (5s cooldown, 3h max runtime, 120 activations/hour) keep automation safe

**Advanced**: Use the Recording feature to capture custom action sequences, or edit profiles via the Graphical Composer or JSON editor.

## Profiles & persistence

- All automations live inside a single JSON document shaped as `{ "version": 1, "profiles": [...] }`.
- The JSON editor in the right column always reflects this complete config; editing it keeps every preset, guardrail, and action in sync across the UI.
- The desktop build persists the config via Tauri’s app directory; the web preview stores it in `localStorage` under `loopautoma.profiles` so you can experiment safely.

### Build from Source (Optional)

For development or customization:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma.git
cd loopautoma
bun install
bun run dev
```

See **[doc/install.md](doc/install.md)** for system requirements, troubleshooting, and detailed build instructions.

## Tech Stack

- Tauri 2 + Rust 2021 backend
- React + TypeScript (Vite, Bun, Vitest) frontend
- Target platforms: Linux (primary), macOS, Windows

## Docs

- **Installation**: [doc/install.md](doc/install.md) — System requirements, packages, and troubleshooting
- **User manual**: [doc/userManual.md](doc/userManual.md) — Guided tour of presets, guardrails, recording, regions, and editors
- **Architecture**: [doc/architecture.md](doc/architecture.md) — Technical design and contracts
- **LLM Prompt Generation**: [doc/llmPromptGeneration.md](doc/llmPromptGeneration.md) — AI-powered dynamic prompts with risk guardrails
- **Rollout plan**: [doc/rollout-plan.md](doc/rollout-plan.md) — Development roadmap and phases
- **Dev setup**: [doc/developer.md](doc/developer.md) — Building and testing from source

## License

GPL‑2.0 — see [LICENSE](LICENSE).

Commit message:

fix: update documentation for X11 automation libraries and action playback

README.md, after:

# LoopAutoma

![Logo](./doc/img/logo.png)

[![CI](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/actions/workflows/ci.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/actions/workflows/ci.yaml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/graph/badge.svg?token=IdaePvWHB4)](https://codecov.io/gh/chrisgleissner/loopautoma)
[![License: GPL v2](https://img.shields.io/github/license/chrisgleissner/loopautoma)](LICENSE)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS%20%7C%20Windows-forestgreen)](doc/architecture.md)

> [!NOTE]
> This project is under active development and not yet fully functional. Some of this documentation refers to not yet fully implemented features.

Cross‑platform desktop automation that watches configurable screen regions and performs keyboard/mouse actions when conditions are met.

## Features

- Keep agents moving: automatically type "Continue" and press enter when an agent stalls.
- **LLM-powered prompts**: Use GPT-4 Vision to analyze screen content and generate context-aware prompts with risk-based guardrails.
- Run unattended: detect stable/changed UI regions and advance the flow.
- Stay safe: cooldowns, rate limits, and guardrails to keep automation bounded.
- Modern UI: dual light/dark palettes, responsive layout, and inline tooltips/icons across every panel.
- Action ergonomics: insert special keys from a dropdown or inline `{Key:Enter}` syntax that automatically splits into discrete actions.

## Quick Start Tutorial

![LoopAutoma UI](./doc/img/ui-screenshot.png)

Need a detailed walkthrough of every panel? Read the [User Manual](doc/userManual.md).

**[Download the latest release](https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma/releases/latest)** with pre-built installers for Linux, macOS, and Windows.

Available formats:

- **Linux**: .deb, .rpm, AppImage
- **macOS**: .dmg (Intel and Apple Silicon)
- **Windows**: .exe installer and .msi

### Ubuntu/Debian Example

```bash
# Download the .deb from releases page, then install
sudo apt install ./loopautoma_*.deb

# Run the app
loopautoma
```

**Note**: Linux requires an X11 session (not Wayland) and X11 automation libraries. Check with `echo "$XDG_SESSION_TYPE"` — if it shows `wayland`, switch to X11 at the login screen. Install dependencies with:

```bash
sudo apt install -y libx11-dev libxi-dev libxtst-dev libxkbcommon-dev libxkbcommon-x11-dev
```

See [doc/install.md](doc/install.md) for detailed setup instructions.

### Using the Keep AI Agent Active Preset

The app loads with a ready-to-use preset that keeps AI agents running:

1. **Define watch regions**: Click the mouse icon (tooltip "Define watch region") and drag over areas where your agent shows output or progress indicators
2. **Start monitoring**: Hit "Start" — the app watches for UI changes and types "continue" + Enter when activity stops
3. **Walk away confidently**: Built-in guardrails (5s cooldown, 3h max runtime, 120 activations/hour) keep automation safe

**Advanced**: Use the Recording feature to capture custom action sequences, or edit profiles via the Graphical Composer or JSON editor.

## Profiles & persistence

- All automations live inside a single JSON document shaped as `{ "version": 1, "profiles": [...] }`.
- The JSON editor in the right column always reflects this complete config; editing it keeps every preset, guardrail, and action in sync across the UI.
- The desktop build persists the config via Tauri’s app directory; the web preview stores it in `localStorage` under `loopautoma.profiles` so you can experiment safely.

### Build from Source (Optional)

For development or customization:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/chrisgleissner/loopautoma.git
cd loopautoma
bun install
bun run dev
```

See **[doc/install.md](doc/install.md)** for system requirements, troubleshooting, and detailed build instructions.

## Tech Stack

- Tauri 2 + Rust 2021 backend
- React + TypeScript (Vite, Bun, Vitest) frontend
- Target platforms: Linux (primary), macOS, Windows

## Docs

- **Installation**: [doc/install.md](doc/install.md) — System requirements, packages, and troubleshooting
- **User manual**: [doc/userManual.md](doc/userManual.md) — Guided tour of presets, guardrails, recording, regions, and editors
- **Architecture**: [doc/architecture.md](doc/architecture.md) — Technical design and contracts
- **LLM Prompt Generation**: [doc/llmPromptGeneration.md](doc/llmPromptGeneration.md) — AI-powered dynamic prompts with risk guardrails
- **Rollout plan**: [doc/rollout-plan.md](doc/rollout-plan.md) — Development roadmap and phases
- **Dev setup**: [doc/developer.md](doc/developer.md) — Building and testing from source

## License

GPL‑2.0 — see [LICENSE](LICENSE).
