doc/developer.md, before:

# Developer Notes — Technical Background

Date: 2025-11-13

This file records environment setup steps already performed locally and offers minimal next steps. It’s not a user guide; it’s a dev scratchpad for context.

Project quick facts

- Desktop shell: Tauri 2 (stable), Rust 2021
- UI: React + TypeScript, Vite, Bun preferred
- Tests: Rust (cargo), UI (Vitest + jsdom), Bun-only tests separated
- Coverage gate (per rollout): ≥90% overall (UI + Rust); enforced in CI
- OS specifics live behind Rust traits; TypeScript stays platform-agnostic

## Steps performed

- `bun create tauri-app`
  - Used to scaffold the Tauri v2 project via Bun with React + TypeScript template.
- `curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh`
  - Installed Rust toolchain (rustup + cargo) via the official installer.
- `bun run dev` (full Tauri app)
  - For pure web (no Tauri), use: `bun run dev:web`

## Follow-ups and quick checks (local)

- Load cargo in the current shell session after rustup install:
  - source "$HOME/.cargo/env"
- Verify toolchains:
  - cargo --version
  - bun --version
- If you scaffolded into a subfolder (recommended), change into it before running dev:
  - cd <your-app-folder>
  - bun install
  - bun run dev

## Notes

- On Linux, Tauri requires system dependencies (e.g., WebKitGTK, libsoup3, build tools). If missing, the scaffolder/CLI will list required packages. See Tauri prerequisites: https://v2.tauri.app/start/prerequisites/
- Our doc prefer Bun for UI dev/build/test. If a blocking compatibility issue occurs, fall back to Node.js 20 LTS.
- Keep the project idiomatic and minimal; follow the contracts in `doc/architecture.md` and acceptance gates in `doc/rollout-plan.md`.

### Linux prerequisites (Ubuntu/Debian)

Install the core system packages required by Tauri 2 (WebKitGTK 4.1, libsoup3, GTK3, etc.). This resolves errors like "The system library `libsoup-3.0` required by crate `soup3-sys` was not found."

Suggested packages:

- pkg-config
- build-essential
- libssl-dev
- libgtk-3-dev
- libwebkit2gtk-4.1-dev
- libsoup-3.0-dev
- librsvg2-dev
- patchelf

Example (Ubuntu/Debian):

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y \
  pkg-config build-essential libssl-dev \
  libgtk-3-dev libwebkit2gtk-4.1-dev libsoup-3.0-dev librsvg2-dev patchelf \
  libxdo-dev

### Ubuntu 24.04 X11 (MVP target)

The MVP targets Ubuntu 24.04 running an X11 session. Wayland is not supported for the MVP.

- Check your session type:

  ```bash
  echo "$XDG_SESSION_TYPE"   # should print: x11
  ```

- To switch to X11: at the Ubuntu login screen, click the gear icon and select “Ubuntu on Xorg” (or “GNOME on Xorg”), then log in.

- Install X11 development libraries used by the backends (screen capture, input capture, input replay):

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y \
    libx11-dev libxext-dev libxrandr-dev \
    libxi-dev libxtst-dev \
    libxkbcommon-dev libxkbcommon-x11-dev
  ```

- Optional verification via pkg-config (should print versions, not errors):

  ```bash
  pkg-config --modversion x11 xext xrandr xi xtst xkbcommon xkbcommon-x11
  ```
```

### Linux capture backends (defaults and options)

Default on Linux is the `screenshots` backend for the smoothest local setup (no PipeWire/SPA headers required). If you want to try the newer `xcap` backend, it requires PipeWire/SPA headers and Clang toolchain (installed in the CI image).

Install the extra packages:

```bash
sudo apt install -y libpipewire-0.3-dev libspa-0.2-dev clang llvm-dev libc6-dev
```

Build explicitly with xcap capture feature:

```bash
# from src-tauri/
cargo build --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap
```

Run the app in dev mode with xcap capture:

```bash
# from project root
TAURI_TRIPLE="" bun run tauri dev -- --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap
```

Opt back into the `screenshots` backend (may emit warnings):

```bash
# from src-tauri/
cargo build --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture

# or run dev from project root
TAURI_TRIPLE="" bun run tauri dev -- --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture
```

Then retry:

```bash
source "$HOME/.cargo/env"
bun run dev
```

#### Troubleshooting: libspa/pipewire bindgen error ("stdbool.h not found")

Symptom during `xcap` build (libspa-sys/pipewire-sys):

```
fatal error: 'stdbool.h' file not found
```

Fix on Ubuntu/Debian:

- Ensure core build tools and C headers are installed:

  ```bash
  sudo apt update
  sudo apt install -y build-essential libc6-dev pkg-config
  ```

- Ensure Clang/LLVM and libclang headers are present for bindgen:

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y clang llvm-dev libclang-dev
  ```

- Ensure PipeWire/SPA dev headers are present:

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y libpipewire-0.3-dev libspa-0.2-dev
  ```

- Verify clang can see its resource includes (should contain stdbool.h):

  ```bash
  clang --version
  ls "$(clang -print-resource-dir)/include" | grep -E '^stdbool.h$' || echo "stdbool.h missing in clang resource dir"
  ```

- If clang still can’t resolve headers, provide explicit include hints for bindgen and rebuild:

  ```bash
  export BINDGEN_EXTRA_CLANG_ARGS="--sysroot=/usr -I$(clang -print-resource-dir)/include"
  cd src-tauri
  cargo clean -p libspa-sys -p pipewire-sys
  cargo build --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap
  ```

- Quick workaround: run with the screenshots backend instead of xcap:

  ```bash
  # from project root
  bun run dev:screenshots
  ```

## Scripts and common tasks

- Dev app window:

```bash
bun run dev
```

- Pure web dev (no Tauri window):

```bash
bun run dev:web
```

- UI build (typecheck + bundle only):

```bash
bun run build:web
```

- Packaging (Linux bundles: .deb, .rpm, .AppImage):

```bash
bun run build
```

Artifacts land under `src-tauri/target/release/bundle/`.

## Tests and coverage

- Bun unit tests (Bun-only files):

```bash
bun test
```

- UI tests with jsdom + coverage (Vitest):

```bash
bun x vitest run --coverage
```

- Rust tests:

```bash
cd src-tauri
cargo test
```

Conventions to keep runners separate:

- Vitest files use the pattern: `tests/**/*.vitest.{ts,tsx,js,jsx}`.
- Bun-only tests use `*.bun.*` (e.g., `hello.bun.test.ts`).
- Avoid `*.vitest.test.tsx` duplicates; if present, keep as stubs so Bun does not execute jsdom tests.

Coverage:

- UI coverage (istanbul) is computed by Vitest.
- Rust coverage runs in CI (tarpaulin). Local Rust coverage is optional and not required for day-to-day dev.

## Backend selection (fakes vs. OS adapters)

Backends implement the traits `ScreenCapture`, `Automation` (input replay), and `InputCapture` (global keyboard/mouse recording).

- Default: OS adapters (feature-gated). On Linux, `os-linux` is enabled by default.
- Force fakes (safe/dev mode):

```bash
LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake bun run tauri dev
```

Notes (Linux backend):

- MVP requires an X11 session. On Wayland, global input capture and injection are typically restricted and may not work.
- Ensure X11 development libraries are installed (see the Ubuntu X11 section above).
- If input capture/injection is blocked by the environment (e.g., Wayland), use `LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake` to run safely with stubbed backends.

Feature flags (Rust crate):

- Defined in `src-tauri/Cargo.toml`:
  - `default = ["os-linux"]`
  - `os-linux`, `os-macos`, `os-windows`

You can compile with a specific target feature set when building the Rust crate directly, e.g.:

```bash
# Build without defaults and enable macOS adapters (example)
cargo build --no-default-features --features os-macos
```

Modules:

- `src-tauri/src/os/linux.rs` → `LinuxCapture`, `LinuxAutomation` (stubs)
- `src-tauri/src/os/macos.rs` → `MacCapture`, `MacAutomation` (stubs)
- `src-tauri/src/os/windows.rs` → `WinCapture`, `WinAutomation` (stubs)

At runtime, selection occurs in `src-tauri/src/lib.rs::select_backends()` using feature gates, with `LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake` as an override.

## E2E and soak

- E2E happy path test: validates event ordering across start → trigger → condition true → action start → action done.
- Soak test (time-dilated): runs many ticks with short `max_runtime` and asserts watchdog trips and monitor stops cleanly.

Both live in `src-tauri/src/tests.rs` and run via `cargo test`.

## CI basics

- Container-native CI:
  - A reusable workflow builds a GHCR image (loopautoma-ci) keyed by a dependency hash (Dockerfile, Cargo.* and bun lockfiles).
  - Downstream jobs run inside that image via `jobs.<name>.container.image` (no repeated `docker run`).
  - The Dockerfile prewarms Bun cache and compiles Rust dependencies so tests don’t re-download crates on each CI run.
- The CI runs UI tests with coverage and Rust tests/coverage, then uploads to Codecov.
- Coverage gate targeted at ≥90% (see rollout plan).

## Troubleshooting

- `document is not defined` while running Bun tests:
  - Cause: Bun discovered jsdom-based Vitest files.
  - Fix: Ensure Vitest tests use `*.vitest.*` and Bun tests use `*.bun.*`. Keep any `*.vitest.test.tsx` as stubs or rename away from Bun discovery.

- Missing Linux system libraries during Tauri build:
  - Install the packages listed above (WebKitGTK 4.1, libsoup3, GTK3, etc.).

- Rust toolchain not available in current shell:
  - `source "$HOME/.cargo/env"`

Commit message:

feat: Enhance screen capture and input handling
- Updated dependencies in Cargo.toml for xcap and device_query.
- Introduced DisplayInfo and ScreenFrame structs for better screen capture data representation.
- Expanded ScreenCapture trait with capture_region and displays methods.
- Implemented FakeCapture for testing with screen capture and display functionalities.
- Added LinuxCapture implementation for screen capturing using xcap.
- Introduced LinuxInputCapture for capturing mouse and keyboard events on Linux.
- Added commands for starting/stopping screen streaming and input recording in the Tauri app.
- Enhanced tests to cover new screen capture and input event functionalities.
- Configured bindgen for better compatibility with system libraries.

doc/developer.md, after:

# Developer Notes — Technical Background

Date: 2025-11-13

This file records environment setup steps already performed locally and offers minimal next steps. It’s not a user guide; it’s a dev scratchpad for context.

Project quick facts

- Desktop shell: Tauri 2 (stable), Rust 2021
- UI: React + TypeScript, Vite, Bun preferred
- Tests: Rust (cargo), UI (Vitest + jsdom), Bun-only tests separated
- Coverage gate (per rollout): ≥90% overall (UI + Rust); enforced in CI
- OS specifics live behind Rust traits; TypeScript stays platform-agnostic

## Steps performed

- `bun create tauri-app`
  - Used to scaffold the Tauri v2 project via Bun with React + TypeScript template.
- `curl https://sh.rustup.rs -sSf | sh`
  - Installed Rust toolchain (rustup + cargo) via the official installer.
- `bun run dev` (full Tauri app)
  - For pure web (no Tauri), use: `bun run dev:web`

## Follow-ups and quick checks (local)

- Load cargo in the current shell session after rustup install:
  - source "$HOME/.cargo/env"
- Verify toolchains:
  - cargo --version
  - bun --version
- If you scaffolded into a subfolder (recommended), change into it before running dev:
  - cd <your-app-folder>
  - bun install
  - bun run dev

## Notes

- On Linux, Tauri requires system dependencies (e.g., WebKitGTK, libsoup3, build tools). If missing, the scaffolder/CLI will list required packages. See Tauri prerequisites: https://v2.tauri.app/start/prerequisites/
- Our doc prefer Bun for UI dev/build/test. If a blocking compatibility issue occurs, fall back to Node.js 20 LTS.
- Keep the project idiomatic and minimal; follow the contracts in `doc/architecture.md` and acceptance gates in `doc/rollout-plan.md`.

### Linux prerequisites (Ubuntu/Debian)

Install the core system packages required by Tauri 2 (WebKitGTK 4.1, libsoup3, GTK3, etc.). This resolves errors like "The system library `libsoup-3.0` required by crate `soup3-sys` was not found."

Suggested packages:

- pkg-config
- build-essential
- libssl-dev
- libgtk-3-dev
- libwebkit2gtk-4.1-dev
- libsoup-3.0-dev
- librsvg2-dev
- patchelf

Example (Ubuntu/Debian):

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y \
  pkg-config build-essential libssl-dev \
  libgtk-3-dev libwebkit2gtk-4.1-dev libsoup-3.0-dev librsvg2-dev patchelf \
  libxdo-dev

### Ubuntu 24.04 X11 (MVP target)

The MVP targets Ubuntu 24.04 running an X11 session. Wayland is not supported for the MVP.

- Check your session type:

  ```bash
  echo "$XDG_SESSION_TYPE"   # should print: x11
  ```

- To switch to X11: at the Ubuntu login screen, click the gear icon and select “Ubuntu on Xorg” (or “GNOME on Xorg”), then log in.

- Install X11 development libraries used by the backends (screen capture, input capture, input replay):

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y \
    libx11-dev libxext-dev libxrandr-dev \
    libxi-dev libxtst-dev \
    libxkbcommon-dev libxkbcommon-x11-dev
  ```

- Optional verification via pkg-config (should print versions, not errors):

  ```bash
  pkg-config --modversion x11 xext xrandr xi xtst xkbcommon xkbcommon-x11
  ```
```

### Linux capture backend (xcap by default)

Linux now uses the `xcap` crate by default for screen capture and hashing. It relies on PipeWire/SPA headers plus a modern Clang/LLVM toolchain (already present in the CI container). Make sure these packages are installed locally:

```bash
sudo apt install -y libpipewire-0.3-dev libspa-0.2-dev clang llvm-dev libc6-dev
```

`cargo build` (or `bun run dev`) already enables the `os-linux-capture-xcap` feature via the default feature set. If you disable defaults for custom builds, remember to re-enable the capture feature explicitly:

```bash
# from src-tauri/
cargo build --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap

# run tauri dev with capture + input backends
TAURI_TRIPLE="" bun run tauri dev -- --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap,os-linux-input
```

If you are missing system headers or simply want to run the UI without native capture, use the fake backend override instead of compiling out xcap:

```bash
LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake bun run dev
```

#### Troubleshooting: libspa/pipewire bindgen error ("stdbool.h not found")

Symptom during `xcap` build (libspa-sys/pipewire-sys):

```
fatal error: 'stdbool.h' file not found
```

Fix on Ubuntu/Debian:

- Ensure core build tools and C headers are installed:

  ```bash
  sudo apt update
  sudo apt install -y build-essential libc6-dev pkg-config
  ```

- Ensure Clang/LLVM and libclang headers are present for bindgen:

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y clang llvm-dev libclang-dev
  ```

- Ensure PipeWire/SPA dev headers are present:

  ```bash
  sudo apt install -y libpipewire-0.3-dev libspa-0.2-dev
  ```

- Verify clang can see its resource includes (should contain stdbool.h):

  ```bash
  clang --version
  ls "$(clang -print-resource-dir)/include" | grep -E '^stdbool.h$' || echo "stdbool.h missing in clang resource dir"
  ```

- If clang still can’t resolve headers, provide explicit include hints for bindgen and rebuild:

  ```bash
  export BINDGEN_EXTRA_CLANG_ARGS="--sysroot=/usr -I$(clang -print-resource-dir)/include"
  cd src-tauri
  cargo clean -p libspa-sys -p pipewire-sys
  cargo build --no-default-features --features os-linux-capture-xcap
  ```

- Quick workaround: temporarily fall back to the fake backend (no real capture):

  ```bash
  LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake bun run dev
  ```

## Scripts and common tasks

- Dev app window:

```bash
bun run dev
```

- Pure web dev (no Tauri window):

```bash
bun run dev:web
```

- UI build (typecheck + bundle only):

```bash
bun run build:web
```

- Packaging (Linux bundles: .deb, .rpm, .AppImage):

```bash
bun run build
```

Artifacts land under `src-tauri/target/release/bundle/`.

## Tests and coverage

- Bun unit tests (Bun-only files):

```bash
bun test
```

- UI tests with jsdom + coverage (Vitest):

```bash
bun x vitest run --coverage
```

- Rust tests:

```bash
cd src-tauri
cargo test
```

Conventions to keep runners separate:

- Vitest files use the pattern: `tests/**/*.vitest.{ts,tsx,js,jsx}`.
- Bun-only tests use `*.bun.*` (e.g., `hello.bun.test.ts`).
- Avoid `*.vitest.test.tsx` duplicates; if present, keep as stubs so Bun does not execute jsdom tests.

Coverage:

- UI coverage (istanbul) is computed by Vitest.
- Rust coverage runs in CI (tarpaulin). Local Rust coverage is optional and not required for day-to-day dev.

## Backend selection (fakes vs. OS adapters)

Backends implement the traits `ScreenCapture`, `Automation` (input replay), and `InputCapture` (global keyboard/mouse recording).

- Default: OS adapters (feature-gated). On Linux, `os-linux` is enabled by default.
- Force fakes (safe/dev mode):

```bash
LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake bun run tauri dev
```

Notes (Linux backend):

- MVP requires an X11 session. On Wayland, global input capture and injection are typically restricted and may not work.
- Ensure X11 development libraries are installed (see the Ubuntu X11 section above).
- If input capture/injection is blocked by the environment (e.g., Wayland), use `LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake` to run safely with stubbed backends.

Feature flags (Rust crate):

- Defined in `src-tauri/Cargo.toml`:
  - `default = ["os-linux"]`
  - `os-linux`, `os-macos`, `os-windows`

You can compile with a specific target feature set when building the Rust crate directly, e.g.:

```bash
# Build without defaults and enable macOS adapters (example)
cargo build --no-default-features --features os-macos
```

Modules:

- `src-tauri/src/os/linux.rs` → `LinuxCapture`, `LinuxAutomation` (stubs)
- `src-tauri/src/os/macos.rs` → `MacCapture`, `MacAutomation` (stubs)
- `src-tauri/src/os/windows.rs` → `WinCapture`, `WinAutomation` (stubs)

At runtime, selection occurs in `src-tauri/src/lib.rs::select_backends()` using feature gates, with `LOOPAUTOMA_BACKEND=fake` as an override.

## E2E and soak

- E2E happy path test: validates event ordering across start → trigger → condition true → action start → action done.
- Soak test (time-dilated): runs many ticks with short `max_runtime` and asserts watchdog trips and monitor stops cleanly.

Both live in `src-tauri/src/tests.rs` and run via `cargo test`.

## CI basics

- Container-native CI:
  - A reusable workflow builds a GHCR image (loopautoma-ci) keyed by a dependency hash (Dockerfile, Cargo.* and bun lockfiles).
  - Downstream jobs run inside that image via `jobs.<name>.container.image` (no repeated `docker run`).
  - The Dockerfile prewarms Bun cache and compiles Rust dependencies so tests don’t re-download crates on each CI run.
- The CI runs UI tests with coverage and Rust tests/coverage, then uploads to Codecov.
- Coverage gate targeted at ≥90% (see rollout plan).

## Troubleshooting

- `document is not defined` while running Bun tests:
  - Cause: Bun discovered jsdom-based Vitest files.
  - Fix: Ensure Vitest tests use `*.vitest.*` and Bun tests use `*.bun.*`. Keep any `*.vitest.test.tsx` as stubs or rename away from Bun discovery.

- Missing Linux system libraries during Tauri build:
  - Install the packages listed above (WebKitGTK 4.1, libsoup3, GTK3, etc.).

- Rust toolchain not available in current shell:
  - `source "$HOME/.cargo/env"`
